---
layout: post
title: "give me a title"
author: <a href="https://arialdomartini.github.io">Arialdo Martini</a>
tags:
- tdd
- functional programming
- property-based testing
ftrou: true
---

<!--more-->

Many have tackled this kata and came to the conclusion that TDD
requires anticipatory thinking to succeed.






## Summaries
### Francesco Cirillo
* Payed workshop.
* It promises that TDD and Anti-IF Programming "let design
  abstractions emerge [...] in a way that prioritizes intentional
  design over algorithmic complexity, allowing for an adaptable and
  emergent solution."
* It states: "No Thinking Ahead Required: Unlike conventional wisdom,
  this workshop will show you how to solve the Diamond Kata using TDD
  without the need for anticipatory thinking [...] showing how
  abstractions emerge naturally through TDD."

### Seb Rose
* Seb uses the Print Diamond Kata in his trainings.
* He relies on the classical test progression (first the `a` case,
  then the `b` case, etc).
* He shows how some implementations are hardcoded (applying Fake It
  Until You Make It).
* He mentions the typical struggle with Example-Based TDD: "The code
  is now screaming for us to refactor it, but to keep all the tests
  passing most people try to solve the entire problem at once. That’s
  hard, because we’ll need to cope with multiple lines, varying
  indentation, and repeated characters with a varying number of spaces
  between them."
* He suggests a second approach: "we start by decomposing the diamond
  problem into smaller constituent parts. This time I chose to write
  the following test:"
* He mentions the "the top half of the diamond", without making it
  explicit it the code.
* He claims that "by recycling the second test multiple times, each
  time modifying the expected output to become closer to what we
  actual want, we’ve allowed ourselves to be guided gradually to a
  solution."

Here are the used tests:

```csharp
[TestFixture]
public class DiamondTest
{
    [Test]
    public void A_should_generate_a_single_character()
    {
        Assert.AreEqual("A", Diamond.Create('A'));
    }
 
    [Test]
    public void B_should_generate_the_smallest_diamond()
    {
        Assert.AreEqual(" A\nB B\n A", Diamond.Create('B'));
    }
 
    [Test]
    public void C_should_generate_the_next_diamond()
    {
        Assert.AreEqual("  A\n B B\nC   C\n B B\n  A", Diamond.Create('C'));
    }
}
```

and:

```csharp
using NUnit.Framework;
 
[TestFixture]
public class DiamondTest
{
    [Test]
    public void A_should_give_single_character()
    {
        Assert.AreEqual("A\n", Diamond.Create('A'));
    }
 
    [Test]
    public void B_should_be_a_diamond()
    {
        Assert.AreEqual(" A\nB B\n A\n", Diamond.Create('B'));
        Assert.AreEqual(" A\n"  +
                        "B B\n" + 
                        " A\n", Diamond.Create('B'));
    }
 
    [Test]
    public void C_should_be_a_bigger_diamond()
    {
        string diamond = "  A\n"   + 
                         " B B\n"  +
                         "C   C\n" +
                         " B B\n"  +
                         "  A\n";
 
        Assert.AreEqual(diamond, Diamond.Create('C'));
    }
 
    [Test]
    public void D_should_be_an_even_bigger_diamond()
    {
        string diamond = "   A\n"   + 
                         "  B B\n"  +
                         " C   C\n" +
                         "D     D\n" +
                         " C   C\n" +
                         "  B B\n"  +
                         "   A\n";
 
        Assert.AreEqual(diamond, Diamond.Create('D'));
    }
}
```




### Alistair Cockburn

* "[...] a few professors had the idea that they might teach
  programmers to think a bit before hitting the keycaps. [...]. They
  showed how to create programs (of a certain category) without error,
  by thinking about the properties of the problem and deriving the
  program as a small exercise in simple logic."
* Accorging to Alistair XP and TDD "when practiced well, involve a
  different kind of thinking – not about the problem, but about the
  code. TDD has become a pablum to avoid thinking."
* His approach is to combine the Dijkstra-Gries approach (thinking
  ahead) with TDD ("modern fine-grained incremental development").
* In his premises, he seems to describe PBT: "What happens if we think
  about the problem and look for patterns and properties before
  starting, and then instead of typing the whole thing in at once, we
  “grow” the program using fine-grained incremental development and
  TDD?"
* Mentions the struggles about incremental development with TDD: 

>    Step 1: Go out and buy really good sneakers. 
>
>    Step 2: Do warmup exercises. 
>
>    Step 3: Jump really really really high, like, to the moon. "

* He promises to reflect on the problem, not on the solution.
* He identifies some properties:
    * The diamond is `2x+1` per `2x+1`.
    * For each row, there are `2x-1` spacers.
    * There is a formula for leading and trailing spaces.
    
* Yet, he implements those ideas following the classical steps (case
  `0`, then `1` etc).
* The formulas he conceived are the implementation. So, the test did
  not guide the design, to the point that he writes the implementation
  before the first test.
* Interestingly, the name of his tests have the typical "ForAll" form
  of a property test:
  
```
def test_02_makes_and_fills_tray_of_any_size
```

* He claims that he did not type in all those tests at once, because
  "to do so is not only against the rules of TDD [...]), but is
  actually dangerous". I don't agree with this: in fact, his
  implementation (the fomula he conceived) was already complete. The
  additional tests did not help evolving the formula.
  
* Even more interestingly, despite the initial good intuitions, his
  tests are a description of the solution, not the problem:
  
```
:test_01_fills_first_and_last_slot_in_tray
:test_02_makes_and_fills_tray_of_any_size
:test_03_makes_bumper_for_row_in_diamond
:test_04_glues_bumpers_to_tray_making_complete_row_in_diamond
:test_05_makes_diamond_the_right_size
:test_06_puts_a_row_in_both_upper_and_lower_half_of_diamond
:test_07_digit_diamond_fills_correctly
```

* Notice the use of expressions like "the right size" and "fills
  correctly".


# References

* [Clem Fandango - How To Draw A Owl][owl]
* [Van Oktop - How To Draw A Horse][how-to-draw-a-horse]

* Resolved with Example-Based Testing
  * [Francesco Cirillo - The Diamond Kata  Anti-IF Workshop][cirillo] 
  * [Seb Rose - Recycling tests in TDD][seb-rose]
  * [Alistair Cockburn - Thinking before programming][alistair-cockburn]
  * [Jon Jagger - sliming and refactoring and deliberate duplication][jon-jagger]
  * [George Dinwiddie -  Another Approach to the Diamond Kata][george-dinwiddie]
  * [Emily Bache - Diamond Kata][emily-bache]
  * [Matteo Vaccari - The Diamond Kata Revisited][matteo-vaccari]
  * [Ron Jeffries - TDD on the Diamond Problem][ron-jeffries-1]
  * [Ron Jeffries - More about Diamond][ron-jeffries-2]

* Resolved with Property-Based Testing
  * [Nat Price - Diamond Kata – TDD with only Property-Based Tests][nat-price]
  * [Mark Seemann - Diamond kata with FsCheck][mark-seemann]
  * [Uldis Sturms - property based testing in javascript - diamond kata][uldis-sturms]
  

[owl]: https://www.reddit.com/r/pics/comments/d3zhx/how_to_draw_an_owl
[how-to-draw-a-horse]: https://oktop.tumblr.com/post/15352780846


[cirillo]: https://www.antiifprogramming.com/anti-if-workshop-the-diamond-kata.php
[seb-rose]: https://claysnow.co.uk/recycling-tests-in-tdd/
[alistair-cockburn]: https://web.archive.org/web/20170621004437/http://alistair.cockburn.us/Thinking+before+programming
[jon-jagger]: https://jonjagger.blogspot.com/2012/06/sliming-and-refactoring-and-deliberate.html
[george-dinwiddie]: https://blog.gdinwiddie.com/2014/11/30/another-approach-to-the-diamond-kata/
[emily-bache]: https://github.com/emilybache/DiamondKata
[matteo-vaccari]: https://matteo.vaccari.name/posts/the-diamond-kata-revisited/
[ron-jeffries-1]: https://ronjeffries.com/articles/tdd-diamond/
[ron-jeffries-2]: https://ronjeffries.com/articles/more-diamond/

[nat-price]: https://semaphoreci.com/community/tutorials/diamond-kata-tdd-with-only-property-based-tests
[mark-seemann]: https://blog.ploeh.dk/2015/01/10/diamond-kata-with-fscheck/
[uldis-sturms]: property based testing in javascript - diamond kata



{% include fp-newsletter.html %}
